= OpenWISP Captive Portals Manager

== Description

OWCPM is a captive portal written from scratch with Ruby on Rails.
Main features:
* multiple captive portal (i.e. one per physical/virtual interface)
* RADIUS / Local authentication
* per-user traffic shaping (EXPERIMENTAL)
* multiple OS support
  * IPv4/GNU-Linux (iptables/tc) already implemented
  * other OS support can be implemented within the proper subclass
* IPv6 support can be easily implemented

== Configuration

=== Networking setup

Before installing and starting OWCPM, please be sure that your machine works (as expected) as a router w/ or w/o NAT.
Please note that auth'ed users traffic and walled gardened traffic will be marked with 0x1xxxx.

For instance assuming that:
* you need logging and NAT
* <cp1 interface>, <cp2 interface>> are the untrusted interfaces
* <wan interface> is your "Internet" interface
* you've correctly set up routing

the startup iptables rules might look like the following:

    *nat
    :PREROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]
    :POSTROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]
    :OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
    -A POSTROUTING -m mark --mark 0x10000/0x10000 -m state --state NEW -j LOG --log-prefix="Captive Portal: "
    -A POSTROUTING -m mark --mark 0x10000/0x10000 -j MASQUERADE
    COMMIT
    *mangle
    :PREROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]
    :INPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
    :FORWARD ACCEPT [0:0]
    :OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
    :POSTROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]
    COMMIT
    *filter
    :INPUT DROP [0:0]
    :FORWARD DROP [0:0]
    -A FORWARD -i <cp1 interface> -o <wan interface> -j ACCEPT
    -A FORWARD -o <cp1 interface> -i <wan interface> -j ACCEPT
    -A FORWARD -i <cp2 interface> -o <wan interface> -j ACCEPT
    -A FORWARD -o <cp2 interface> -i <wan interface> -j ACCEPT
    :OUTPUT DROP [0:0]
    -A INPUT -i lo -j ACCEPT
    -A INPUT -i <wan interface> -m state --state RELATED,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
    -A OUTPUT -o lo -j ACCEPT
    -A OUTPUT -o <wan interface> -m state --state NEW,RELATED,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
    COMMIT

=== Web server setup

You'll also need to configure a web server for the redirection process and to host that captive pages (optional).

For instance, if you wan't to use apache2 you'll need to configure two virtual hosts. So you configuration will look like to the following:

    Listen [owcpm http port]
    <VirtualHost *:[owcpm http port]>

      DocumentRoot [your owcpm directory]/public

      LogLevel warn
      ErrorLog [error log file]
      CustomLog [access log file] combined

      PassengerDefaultUser www-data # Change it to reflect your needs
      RackEnv production            # Change it to reflect your needs
      RailsEnv production           # Change it to reflect your needs

      <Directory [your owcpm directory]/public>
        AllowOverride all
        Options -MultiViews
        Order allow,deny
        Allow from all
      </Directory>

    </VirtualHost>


    <IfModule mod_ssl.c>
      Listen [owcpm https port]

      <VirtualHost _default_:[owcpm https port]>
        SSLEngine on

        DocumentRoot [your owcpm directory]/public

        PassengerDefaultUser www-data # Change it to reflect your needs
        RackEnv production            # Change it to reflect your needs
        RailsEnv production           # Change it to reflect your needs

        <Directory [your owcpm directory]/public>
          Allow from all
          Options -MultiViews
        </Directory>

        Alias / "[your owcpm directory]"
        <Directory [your owcpm directory]/public>
          AllowOverride all
          Options -MultiViews
          Order allow,deny
          Allow from all
        </Directory>

        LogLevel warn
        ErrorLog [error log file]
        CustomLog [access log file] combined

        SSLCertificateFile [certificate file]
        SSLCertificateKeyFile [key file]
        SSLCACertificateFile [ca chain file]
      </VirtualHost>
    </IfModule>

=== Background jobs

The following script can be used to start the captive portal daemons.
At start captive portal daemons will create the appropriate iptables rules (that will be removed at stop).

    #!/bin/sh
    ### BEGIN INIT INFO
    # Provides:          owcpm-daemons
    # Required-Start:    $local_fs $network
    # Required-Stop:     $local_fs $network
    # Default-Start:     2 3 4 5
    # Default-Stop:      0 1 6
    # Short-Description: Starting owcpm-daemons
    # Description:       Starting owcpm-daemons
    ### END INIT INFO#

    ########## Variables for openwisp-daemons ##########

    # The directory in which all the various OpenWisp
    # applications are deployed. Generally it's /var/www
    # or /var/rails
    OPENWISP_BASE_PATH="/var/rails"

    # The daemon you wish to start with this script
    # (it must have already been deployed of course).
    OPENWISP_APP="owcpm"

    # The Rails environment in which the script must be run.
    # It will almost always be set to production.
    RAILS_ENV="production"

    ####################################################

    export PATH RAILS_ENV

    # Define LSB log_* functions.
    # Depend on lsb-base (>= 3.0-6) to ensure that this file is present.
    . /lib/lsb/init-functions

    bundle_exec() {
      cd $1 && bundle exec $2
      return $?
    }

    openwisp_daemons_start() {
      bundle_exec $OPENWISP_BASE_PATH/$OPENWISP_APP 'rake daemons:start'
    }

    openwisp_daemons_stop() {
      bundle_exec $OPENWISP_BASE_PATH/$OPENWISP_APP 'rake daemons:stop'
    }

    openwisp_daemons_restart() {
      bundle_exec $OPENWISP_BASE_PATH/$OPENWISP_APP 'rake daemons:restart'
    }

    openwisp_daemons_status() {
      bundle_exec $OPENWISP_BASE_PATH/$OPENWISP_APP 'rake daemons:status'
    }

    case "$1" in
      start)
        log_daemon_msg "Starting OpenWISP daemon" "$NAME"
        openwisp_daemons_start
        RET="$?"
        log_end_msg $RET
        return $RET
        ;;
      stop)
        log_daemon_msg "Stopping OpenWISP daemon" "$NAME"
        openwisp_daemons_stop
        if [ $? -eq 0 ]; then
          RET="1"
        else
          RET="0"
        fi
        log_end_msg $RET
        return $RET
        ;;
      restart)
        log_daemon_msg "Restarting OpenWISP daemon" "$NAME"
        openwisp_daemons_restart
        RET="$?"
        log_end_msg $RET
        return $RET
        ;;
      status)
        openwisp_daemons_status
        RET="$?"
        return $RET
        ;;
      *)
        echo "Usage: /etc/init.d/$NAME {start|stop|restart|status}" >&2
        exit 1
        ;;
    esac

    exit 0

== API details

There are two API method available at the moment:

* login
* logout

The API can respond in *json* and *xml*.

Parameters must be sent in *application/x-www-form-urlencoded* format.

All the methods of this API can be used only by authorized servers.

The default behaviour is that only local requests are authorized.

To authorize a remote server to use the API copy the file *config/config.default.yml* and rename it in *config/config.yml* then add the addreses in the right ruby syntax for arrays.

=== Login

POST */api/v1/account/login*

Required parameters:
* username
* password

Optional parameters:
* *ip*: private ip address to login, if omitted the ip address of the device that makes the request is assumed
* *timeout*: (seconds)

Logs in the specified user and returns *200* plus a message if succeed.

If a timeout (in seconds) is specified that value will be used as a session timeout for the user browsing session.

If any of the required parameters is missing the method will return *400* HTTP response code plus an error message.

If username or password are incorrect or the user is not verified it will return *403* plus an error message.

If daily quota limit exceeded it will return *403* plus an error message.

If the ip param is specified, the host of the server that tries to use the API must be in the *api_allowed_ips* configuration array, otherwise the server will respond with a *403* HTTP response code plus an error message.

If the ip specified (or assumed) does not result associated in the captive portal DB the method will return *403* plus an error message.

=== Logout

POST */api/v1/account/logout*

Required parameters: username, ip

Logs out the specified username with the specified ip address and returns *200* plus a message if succeed.

If any of the required parameters is missing the method will return *400* HTTP response code plus an error message.

If the ip param is specified, the host of the server that tries to use the API must be in the *api_allowed_ips* configuration array, otherwise the server will respond with a *403* HTTP response code plus an error message.

If the combination of username and or IP does not result logged in the request will fail and will return a *403* HTTP response code plus an error message.

=== Status

POST */api/v1/account/status*

Required parameters: username

Retrieve session information about specified user.

Returns 200 plus session info if user is logged in.

Returns 404 if user is not logged in.

Returns 400 if username is missing

== Allow traffic to routes assigned to AS number

Command: **rake allow_traffic:autonomous_system[<AS_NUMBER>,<CAPTIVE_PORTAL_ID>,<PROTOCOL>,<SOURCE_MAC_ADDRESS>,<SOURCE_HOST>,<SOURCE_PORT>,<DESTINATION_PORT>,<NOTE>]**

What is for: creates allowed traffic rules to routes assigned to a specific autonomous system number.

**Example**, allow traffic to allow all incoming TCP traffic to facebook on port 443 through captive portal with id 1:

    RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec rake allow_traffic:autonomous_system[AS32934,1,tcp,,,,443,facebook-443]

== Copyright

Copyright (C) 2012 OpenWISP.org

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
